<?xml version="1.0"?>

<!DOCTYPE html [
  <!ENTITY hub.usage SYSTEM 'PlasticHub.usage'>
  <!ENTITY monitor.usage SYSTEM 'PlasticMonitor.usage'>
  <!ENTITY request.usage SYSTEM 'PlasticRequest.usage'>
]>

<html>
<head>
<title>PlasKit</title>
</head>

<body>
<h1>PlasKit</h1>

<ul>
<li><a href="#intro">Description</a></li>
<li><a href="#tools">Tools</a></li>
<li><a href="#download">Download</a></li>
<li><a href="#versions">Versions</a></li>
</ul>

<hr/>

<h2>Description</h2>

<p>PlasKit is a toolkit for use with the 
<a href="http://plastic.sourceforge.net/">PLASTIC</a> protocol.
It contains a hub implementation, utility classes which make it
painless to invoke or serve PLASTIC requests via either RMI or XML-RPC,
some command-line tools useful for debugging and monitoring purposes,
and a few other components, such as a <code>ListModel</code>
implementation which reflects the PlasticListeners currently registered
with the hub.
</p>

<p>The package is fairly lightweight, and has no external dependencies
other than the RMI-lite and XML-RPC implementations.
</p>

<p><strong>Note:</strong>
This software is experimental, and hasn't been tested to destruction.
The hub implementation may or may not match the current or any other
version of the PLASTIC standard.
Currently, the PLASTIC hub implementation recommended to the PLASTIC
community is the one provided in the AstroGrid ACR
(see <a href="http://software.astrogrid.org/"
        >http://software.astrogrid.org</a>).
</p>

<p>This software is released under the GNU
<a href="http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html"
   >Lesser General Public License</a>.
</p>

<hr/>

<h2><a name="tools"/>Command-line tools</h2>

<p>The following classes have <code>main</code> methods which mean they
can be invoked from the command line.  Slightly more information can
be found in their javadoc entries.
</p>

<h3>PlasticHub</h3>
<p>Hub implementation with optional logging to standard output
and/or graphical display.
</p>
<usage class="uk.ac.starlink.plastic.PlasticHub"/>

<h3>PlasticMonitor</h3>
<p>Registers with the hub and monitors traffic.
Can log (barely) human-readable messages to standard output describing
PLASTIC traffic and/or display a graphical indication of currently
registered applications.
Can connect to the hub using either RMI or XML-RPC protocols
(the latter is only really useful for testing the XML-RPC mode of a hub).
</p>
<usage class="uk.ac.starlink.plastic.PlasticMonitor"/>

<h3>PlasticRequest</h3>
<p>Makes one-off requests to the hub from the command line.
</p>
<usage class="uk.ac.starlink.plastic.PlasticRequest"/>

<h3>HubTester</h3>
<p>Runs unit tests against a running hub, and exits with an error status
(and stackdump) if any of the assertions fails.
Should be improved to give rather more useful messages.
</p>
<usage class="uk.ac.starlink.plastic.HubTester"/>

<hr/>
<h2><a name="download"/>Download</h2>

<h3>Software</h3>

<p>You can pick up the classes either as separate jar files:
<ul>
<li><a href="plastic.jar" reportfilesize="yes">plastic.jar</a></li>
<li><a href="rmi-lite.jar" reportfilesize="yes">rmi-lite.jar</a></li>
<li><a href="xmlrpc-2.0.jar" reportfilesize="yes">xmlrpc-2.0.jar</a></li>
<li><a href="commons-codec-1.3.jar"
       reportfilesize="yes">commons-codec-1.3.jar</a>
    - required by XML-RPC</li>
</ul>
or as one combined jar file for convenience:
<ul>
<li><a href="plastic-full.jar" reportfilesize="yes">plastic-full.jar</a></li>
</ul>
or a single combined standalone hub file - this contains a minimum number
of classes for a working hub, but without any of the bells and whistles
(logging, GUI window, request verification etc) that you get with the
normal hub.  This jar file has no dependencies.
<ul>
<li><a href="microhub.jar" reportfilesize="yes">microhub.jar</a></li>
</ul>
</p>

<h3>Javadocs</h3>
<ul>
<li>Browse the <a href="javadocs/index.html">javadocs online</a></li>
<li>Download <a href="plastic-javadocs.zip"
                reportfilesize="yes">javadoc zip file</a></li>
</ul>

<h3>Source</h3>

<ul>
<li><a href="plastic-src.zip" reportfilesize="yes">Sources zip file</a></li>
</ul>

<hr />

<a name="versions"/>
<h2>Version History</h2>

<dl>
<dt><a name="v0.1" /><b>Version 0.1 (20 Feb 2006)</b></dt>
<dd>Initial release; corresponds to v0.2 of the PLASTIC standard.</dd>

<dt><a name="v0.2" /><b>Version 0.2 (19 Apr 2006)</b></dt>
<dd><ul>
    <li>Now conforms to v0.4 of the PLASTIC standard
        (extra hub methods, XML-RPC methods no longer in 
        <code>plastic.client</code> namespace)</li>
    <li>Hub and Monitor now provide ListModel implementations which keep
        track of currently registered applications.</li>
    <li>Hub and Monitor now optionally display window showing list of
        currently registered applications.</li>
    <li>Fixed hub bug which failed to register applications with certain
        non-alphanumeric characters in their names.</li>
    </ul></dd>

<dt><a name="v0.3" /><b>Version 0.3 (26 May 2006)</b></dt>
<dd><ul>
    <li>Now doesn't leave zombie <code>.plastic</code> files on Windows.</li>
    <li>Faster at locating unused sockets (fewer ugly stacktraces too).</li>
    <li>Fixed various XML-RPC bugs.</li>
    <li>Added <code>XmlRpcHub</code> (mainly for testing purposes).</li>
    </ul></dd>

<dt><a name="0.4" /><b>Version 0.4 (7 Aug 2006)</b></dt>
<dd><ul>
    <li>Provided new <code>CustomTransportFactory</code> implementation;
        this provides better error reporting than the xmlrpc-2.0 version
        in some cases.</li>
    <li>New <code>HubTester</code> class.</li>
    </ul></dd>

<dt><b>Next version</b></dt>
<dd><ul>
    <li>Add more tests to HubTester.</li>
    <li>Improve PlasticMonitor.</li>
    <li>Fix hub synchronization bug.</li>
    <li>Add standalone microhub jar.</li>
    <li>Add more utility classes and methods for use of applications.</li>
    <li>Publicise ServerSet class.</li>
    <li>Add PlasticUtils.waitToRegister method.</li>
    <li>Add HubManager.setAugoRegister method.</li>
    </ul></dd>

</dl>

<hr/>
Mark Taylor, Astrophysics group, Bristol University, UK<br/>
<dl>
<dt>Mail</dt>
<dd><a href="mailto:m.b.taylor@bristol.ac.uk"
                   >m.b.taylor@bristol.ac.uk</a></dd>
<dt>WWW</dt>
<dd><a href="http://www.star.bristol.ac.uk/~mbt/"
            >http://www.star.bristol.ac.uk/~mbt/</a></dd>
</dl>

</body>
</html>
